document implementation details of the operator (#661)
kiali/kiali-operator: IMPLEMENTATION.adoc

NOTE: This document reflects the current implementation as of release link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/tree/v1.69.0[v1.69.0]

NOTE: To learn how to set up and run the KO within your own development environment, see link:./DEVELOPING.adoc[DEVELOPING.adoc].

== Ansible

The core of the KO is Ansible. The KO utilizes the link:https://sdk.operatorframework.io/docs/building-operators/ansible/[Ansible Operator SDK] to provide the base Kubernetes operator functionality. The Kiali-specific code is implemented inside Ansible link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/tree/v1.69.0/playbooks[playbooks] and link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/tree/v1.69.0/roles[roles].

NOTE: The KO needs to periodically update its Ansible Operator SDK base image. To see how this is done, just do the same things done previously (see link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali/issues/6220[this issue] and link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/pull/657/files[this PR] as good examples of what needs to be done).

== Multiple Version Support

> The KO can support installing multiple versions of the Kiali server by invoking different versions of the Ansible roles. The versions the KO supports is defined in link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/blob/v1.69.0/playbooks/default-supported-images.yml[default-supported-images.yml]. For each version supported, there is an link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/tree/v1.69.0/roles[Ansible role] that the KO executes when it needs to install or remove Kiali of that version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The KO can support installing multiple versions of the Kiali server by invoking different versions of the Ansible roles. The versions the KO supports are defined in link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/blob/v1.69.0/playbooks/default-supported-images.yml[default-supported-images.yml]. For each version supported, there is an link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/tree/v1.69.0/roles[Ansible role] that the KO executes when it needs to install or remove that Kiali version.
```

NOTE: If you need to add support for a new version or remove support for an obsolete version, see link:./DEVELOPING.adoc[DEVELOPING.adoc] for those instructions.

> To tell the KO which version of Kiali to install, you set the `spec.version` field in the Kiali CR. If no `spec.version` is defined in the Kiali CR, the default Ansible role that is executed is defined  in link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/blob/v1.69.0/playbooks/default-playbook.yml[default-playbook.yml] (side note: the file, and the field inside it, are technically named incorrectly. This isn't the default _playbook_, instead it is the default _role_. But ignore that.) Today, the default version of the Ansible role that is invoked is called, literally, link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/tree/v1.69.0/roles/default[default]. This `default` version is the only one that the upstream Kiali project officially supports.

Author: done.

- link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/tree/v1.69.0/playbooks/kiali-remove.yml[kiali-remove.yml] - this is invoked when a Kiali CR has been removed. This playbook determines which version of Kiali is being uninstalled (as found in the now-deleted Kiali CR's `spec.version` field) and runs that version's corresponding `kiali-remove` link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/tree/v1.69.0/roles[Ansible role].

> - link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/tree/v1.69.0/playbooks/kiali-new-namespace-detected.yml[kiali-new-namespace-detected.yml] - this is invoked when a new namespace is created in the cluster. This playbook is simple and small. It's only job is to simply "touch" any and all existing Kiali CRs such that they will be immediately reconciled by the KO. ("Touching" in this context means adding/modifying an link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/blob/v1.69.0/playbooks/kiali-new-namespace-detected.yml#L30-L31[annotation to the Kiali CR] such that that modification will cause the KO to trigger a reconcilation). The playbook will only touch those Kiali CRs link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/blob/v1.69.0/playbooks/kiali-new-namespace-detected.yml#L34[if the namespace was created after the Kiali CR was created] and if the link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/blob/v1.69.0/playbooks/kiali-new-namespace-detected.yml#L21[Kiali CR was not modified or touched within the current minute]. This playbook enables a useful feature for those Kiali installations that are not given cluster-wide access but are given access to a set of namespaces defined by regular expressions (see `spec.deployment.accessible_namespaces`) or by Istio discovery selectors. In that case, when the KO reconciles the touched Kiali CRs, it will create the necessary Role/RoleBinding resources to give the Kiali installation access to the new namespace that was detected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/tree/v1.69.0/playbooks/kiali-new-namespace-detected.yml[kiali-new-namespace-detected.yml] - this is invoked when a new namespace is created in the cluster. This playbook is simple and small. It's only job is to simply "touch" any and all existing Kiali CRs ("touching" in this context means adding/modifying an link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/blob/v1.69.0/playbooks/kiali-new-namespace-detected.yml#L30-L31[annotation to the Kiali CR] such that the modification will cause the KO to trigger a reconcilation). The playbook will only touch those Kiali CRs link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/blob/v1.69.0/playbooks/kiali-new-namespace-detected.yml#L34[if the namespace was created after the Kiali CR was created] and if the link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/blob/v1.69.0/playbooks/kiali-new-namespace-detected.yml#L21[Kiali CR was not modified or touched within the current minute]. This playbook enables a useful feature for those Kiali installations that are not given cluster-wide access but are given access to a set of namespaces defined by regular expressions (see `spec.deployment.accessible_namespaces`) or by Istio Discovery Selectors. In that case, when the KO reconciles the touched Kiali CRs, it will create the necessary Role/RoleBinding resources to give the Kiali installation access to the newly detected namespace.
```

* link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/tree/v1.69.0/roles/default/kiali-deploy/defaults[defaults] - defines defaults for virtually every setting possible in the Kiali CR. Note that a top-level dict is defined (`kiali_defaults`) with everything under it. This is because the `vars` (see below) need to do a trick in order to support the use-case where the user doesn't define every setting in the Kiali CR (which is the typical use-case). Read link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/blob/v1.69.0/roles/default/kiali-deploy/vars/main.yml#L1-L9[the comment here] to understand the purpose of the trick. Any new setting added to the Kiali CR schema should (almost always) have a default set here. There are a few cases where having an undefined default is necessary, but most times it is not. When in doubt, set the default here.
* link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/tree/v1.69.0/roles/default/kiali-deploy/filter_plugins[filter_plugins] - filter plugins are a way to jump from Ansible into a Python context when things are easier or more efficient to do with Python code rather than directly within Ansible tasks. There are two custom filters the KO uses in the deploy role:

> ** link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/blob/v1.69.0/roles/default/kiali-deploy/filter_plugins/only_accessible_namespaces.py[only_accessible_namespaces] - given a list of all known namespaces and a list of accessible namespace regular expressions, this filters out all non-accessible namespaces (i.e. returns a list of only the namespaces that match an accessible namespace regex). Example usage link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/blob/v1.69.0/roles/default/kiali-deploy/tasks/main.yml#L556[here].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/blob/v1.69.0/roles/default/kiali-deploy/filter_plugins/only_accessible_namespaces.py[only_accessible_namespaces.py] - given a list of all known namespaces and a list of accessible namespace regular expressions, this filters out all non-accessible namespaces (i.e. returns a list of only the namespaces that match an accessible namespace regex). Example usage link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/blob/v1.69.0/roles/default/kiali-deploy/tasks/main.yml#L556[here].
```

** link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/blob/v1.69.0/roles/default/kiali-deploy/filter_plugins/stripnone.py[stripnone] - Recursively processes a given dict value and removes all keys that have a None value. This is needed when setting up the startup variable values. Example usage link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/blob/v1.69.0/roles/default/kiali-deploy/vars/main.yml#L36[here].

> * link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/tree/v1.69.0/roles/default/kiali-deploy/meta[meta] - The KO only uses this to declare what collections it wants to use. Today, the KO only needs to link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/blob/v1.69.0/roles/default/kiali-deploy/meta/main.yml[declare the kubernetes.core collection].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/tree/v1.69.0/roles/default/kiali-deploy/meta[meta] - The KO only uses this to declare the collections it wants to use. Today, the KO only needs to link:https://github.com/kiali/kiali-operator/blob/v1.69.0/roles/default/kiali-deploy/meta/main.yml[declare the kubernetes.core collection].
```
